# Thaipusam
Thaipusam is a temple festival celebrated by Hindus of Tamil descent in Singapore. It is probably the single most important public rite observed by the community every year between January 14 and February 14. Most Hindu festivals fall either on full-moon day (Punarpusam) or on new-moon day (Amavasi). “Thai Pusam” occurs on the full moon day in the Tamil month, Thai (January–February). Thaipusam is actually derived from thai which means “10th”, and pusam meaning “when the moon is at its brightest”. It is thus celebrated in the month of Thai (10th month according to the Tamil Almanac) on the day when the moon passes through the star “Pusam”. Thaipusam is a day of prayers and penance. Dedicated to Lord Subramaniam, also known as Lord Murugan, a major South Indian god, the deity of youth, power and virtue, this festival is a time for repentance for devotees with celebrations carried out mainly at the temple.

## Preparations
Preparations for Thaipusam start months in advance. But the conditioning of the body and mind is done about a week before the festival itself. Devotees prepare themselves spiritually with extensive prayer and fasting before performing acts of penance or thanksgiving like carrying a kavadi. The basic kavadi consists of a short wooden pole surmounted by a wooden arch, decorated with peacock feathers (symbolic of Murugan, as the peacock is his mascot), margosa leaves and other materials. Often, sharp skewers are pierced through the tongues, cheeks and bodies of kavadi-bearers as a practice of self-mortification. Women, on the other hand, carry vessels with offerings that include fruits, flowers and pots of milk. Thaipusam was a public holiday in Singapore until 1968 when Bill No. 33/68 was effected in the Holidays (Amendment) Act, 1968. This change was made in consultation with the Hindu Advisory Board.

## Legend
This Hindu festival commemorates the feats of the Hindu deity, Lord Subramaniam, son of Lord Siva and Goddess Sakti. According to the Hindu mythological book, “Skanda Purana,” Thaipusam was the day when Lord Subramaniam appeared before his devotees mounted on a peacock which has come to be known as his “vahana”’ or vehicle. It also acknowledges Subramaniam’s triumph over the evil forces. According to the legend, devas or celestial beings at one time were so plagued by asura, or demons, that they pleaded with Lord Siva, to help them. Touched by their pleas, Lord Siva sent his son Subramaniam to conquer the asuras. After accomplishing this task, the victorious Subramaniam was believed to have appeared before his devotees. In the vision, he was bedecked with brilliant jewels, armed with a golden spear and seated on a chariot. Thus, on Thaipusam day, Lord Subramaniam’s image, adorned and decorated, is placed on a silver chariot before his devotees. This is then taken in a procession. Besides being acknowledged as a symbol of bravery, power, virtue, and beauty, the Hindus believe that Lord Subramaniam is also the universal dispenser of favours. Hence, some who have made vows and pledges to Lord Subramaniam prove their gratitude to him by undergoing self-mortification on Thaipusam day. Penitents in fulfilment of vows carry the kavadi.

## Rites, rituals and sacrifices
The most popular form of sacrifice is the carrying of the kavadi which means “sacrifice at every step”. It is the kavadi that identifies the festival of Thaipusam. Legend has it that Iduban, a devotee of Lord Subramaniam, carried an offering which so pleased him that he showered his people with good fortune. The burden carried by Iduban has passed down in the form of the kavadi. Devotees carry the kavadis to ask for forgiveness, keep a vow or offer thanks to Lord Subramaniam. The symbolism of carrying the kavadi originates from a myth where the kavadi represents a mountain with Lord Subramaniam at its apex. The smaller, semi-circular kavadi is a steel or D-shaped wooden frame with bars for support on the shoulders, normally decorated with flowers and peacock feathers. Other forms of sacrifice include piercing silver pins through the cheek and tongue and pricking the body with hooks and spear-like needles. The piercing of flesh in connection with carrying kavadi is central to Thaipusam as the rite is understood in Singapore. It is closely associated with the Hindu concepts of ritual purity and pollution. A kavadi carrier can have as many as 100 spears piercing his flesh, but apparently loses little blood, sustained by faith in a trancelike state. The devotees who intend to perform the sacrifice are customarily required to observe strict physical and mental discipline. Throughout the tenth month of Thai, purification of the body is a necessity. This includes taking just one vegetarian meal a day, and sexual abstinence. In addition, a 24-hour fast is observed on the eve of Thaipusam. Most women devotees carry a pot of milk called a palkuddam. The milk is poured over the statue of Lord Subramaniam at the end of the procession. Those who take part are usually individuals who have asked the deity for a favour. In return, they vow to undergo the ritual test of physical and spiritual endurance. Apart from those who go to the temples on Thaipusam day to fulfil their vows and to do penance, there are others who go with their families to offer prayers and to seek spiritual solace.

## The procession
The deeply religious festival is a spectacular sight largely because of the colourful procession of bare-footed devotees carrying the kavadi along public roads. The Hindu Endowments Board helps to organise the annual ceremony. For years in Singapore, the traditional route for kavadi bearers has been from Sri Srinivasa Perumal Temple at Serangoon Road to Tank Road. Thousands gathered and crowded the temple grounds by midnight. The kavadi carriers, together with their relatives, friends and well-wishers, congregate here in the morning to participate in the three- to four-kilometre procession to their final destination at the Sri Thandayuthapani Temple, commonly known as the Murugan Temple or Chettiar’s Temple. The 136-year-old temple is an establishment belonging to the Nattukottai Chettiar community, a caste of merchants and moneylenders. The kavadi procession starts as early as 4am. Leaving at intervals of 15 minutes, the last kavadi group leaves at 7.30pm. The devotees used to stop for a while in front of the Sivan Temple in Orchard to pay homage to Lord Siva. The Sri Sivan Temple has since been relocated on Serangoon Road, and the half-way halt was not required. Instead, arrangements were made for them to pay their homage to Lord Siva before they start the procession. All along the way, devotees chant hymns in praise of the deity. The celebrants following the procession chant “Vel, vel, kavadi”. The belief is that Lord Murugan was given an invincible spear, “Vel”, which he used successfully to overcome the demons. The arrival of the kavadi carriers at the Murugan Temple at Tank Road marks the accomplishment of their task. A mixture of fruits and honey is prepared and distributed among the devotees. Thousands of poor are fed for three days in the temple precincts. A ceremony is commonly held in the devotee’s home thereafter. A domestic worship of Murugan is performed followed by a festive meal served to family and friends.