# Chingay
Chingay is an annual street parade held in Singapore as part of the Lunar New Year celebrations. The Hokkien term chingay is derived from the Chinese term 妆艺, which means “the art of costume and masquerade”. In the 1899 Amoy (Hokkien) dictionary, Carstair Douglas defines the term as “to decorate a frame with incense and boys dressed as girls carried in processions”. The practice seems to have originated in China, where processions in Canton had been recorded in the 19th century of dressed-up children being carried on platforms.

## Early origins
It is commonly believed that 19th-century Chinese immigrants first brought the chingay practice to Penang. Penang’s festivals became famous for lavish processions featuring elaborate chingay and huge flags. In Singapore, what appeared to be chingay platforms were mentioned as early as 1840 in the press, though seemingly chingay processions were reported only from the 1880s. These processions carried on until 1906 when clans abolished the practice of organising grand processions. Singapore’s modern Chingay parade began in 1973 and has evolved over the years into a multicultural event that includes participants of diverse ethnicities and nationalities.

## Chingay in Malaya
While it is difficult to ascertain exactly when or how chingay began in Malaya, it is believed that migrants from southern China brought the practice to the British settlement of Penang during the 19th century. Chingay processions were organised for religious festivals devoted to Chinese deities. Usually a lavish affair, the event involved the whole town and drew numerous visitors from other parts of the region. Processions featured the distinctive chingay platforms, but these were mounted on carts or carriages as floats, rather than carried on the shoulders of men as originally practised in China. On each float would be elaborate paper dolls and animals depicting religious themes and historical scenes, and lanterns in the shape of animals or fruits. According to one of the earliest newspaper reports of this festival in September 1883, a three-day chingay procession to honour Tua Pek Kong cost more than $25,000. By the turn of the century, Penang had become well known for its chingay processions to honour Tua Pek Kong and Kuan Yin (also Kwan Im), the Goddess of Mercy.

Other than Penang, chingay processions take place in other parts of Malaya, such as Kuching and Johor Bahru. The latter’s annual Chingay centres around a procession of five deities from a Chinese temple and attracts crowds from Singapore. In 2012, Johor Bahru’s Chingay was added to Malaysia’s intangible cultural heritage list. 

## Chingay in early Singapore
Processions to honour Chinese religious deities were apparently a regular occurrence in 19th-century Singapore. The earliest account appeared in April 1840, describing festivities in honour of the deity Ma Chor Po, the protector of seafarers. Children being carried on platforms was characteristic of a chingay, though this was not mentioned in the report. One of the earliest explicit reference to a chingay procession was a brief mention in a January 1884 newspaper article, while a December 1887 article described the participation of Teochew, Cantonese, Hylam and Keh contingents in an extensive procession that took several hours to pass through the Chinatown and Tanjong Pagar areas. This year-end combined chingay procession by the non-Hokkiens had become an annual event by the late 19th century, and continued into the early 20th century. 

Chingay processions held by the Hokkiens are less frequent. A February 1893 notice in the Daily Advertiser said the processions were triennial, although a Mid-day Herald in 1895 article said that the triennial Hokkien chingay had been held the day before, after a lapse of six years.

On 16 December 1906, at a large meeting of Hokkien Chinese led by clan leader Lee Cheng Yan, chingay processions were denounced as a financially extravagant and culturally backward practice. A unanimous decision was taken to abolish chingay processions, stop public subscriptions for such events, and use the funds saved for educational purposes instead. The decision was confirmed soon after at another large meeting, and other clans adopted similar resolutions, thus ending the practice of the Singapore Chinese community staging chingay processions. However, the community agreed to have chingay floats as part of the 1911 procession celebrating King George V’s coronation. Chingay was also part of the Chinese section of processions staged during the visit of the Duke and Duchess of York to Singapore in 1901, and the visit of Prince Arthur of Connaught in 1906. Amusement park advertisements from the 1920s and ’30s showed that New World and Happy World staged at least three processions with chingay.

## Modern Chingay parade
In June 1972, a bill was passed banning firecrackers due to deaths and injuries from fatal explosions. The absence of traditional firecrackers to celebrate the Lunar New Year caused unhappiness and reduced public enthusiasm for the occasion. As an alternative, then Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew suggested the staging of a Chingay parade similar to the one held in Penang, according to the People’s Association commemorative book on the Chingay.

Organised by the People’s Association and National Pugilistic Federation, the first Chingay procession in postwar Singapore was held on 4 February 1973 and involved about 2,000 performers. The procession started from Victoria School in Jalan Besar and ended at Outram Park. It was led by a large statue of a bull to signify the Year of the Ox. The event introduced clowns dressed in costumes with oversized heads, and also featured lion dancers, jugglers, stilt-walkers dressed in ancient Chinese costumes, and 20-foot-long flags. It was telecast live by Radio Television Singapore.

With its initial success, the Chingay parade became an annual event. In its early years, the procession was staged in different public housing estates such as Toa Payoh (1974), Marine Parade (1978) and Ang Mo Kio (1980). The parade moved to the Orchard Road shopping belt for the first time in 1985 and continued to be held there for 15 years. In 1990, the first night Chingay was held. To celebrate the millennium in 2000, the procession took a new route beginning at the former City Hall building (now part of the National Art Gallery, Singapore) and ending at the Suntec City Fountain of Wealth. The event was held in Chinatown for the first time in 2003.

The parade is usually themed around the Chinese zodiac animal for the new lunar year, and features a range of other performers and floats. To usher in the Chinese Year of the Dog in 1994, for instance, the parade included a procession of about 30 dogs from the Singapore Kennel Club.

Today, Chingay takes place over the second weekend of the Lunar New Year season. Known for its carnival atmosphere, it is a multicultural event involving not only the Chinese but also other ethnic groups and elements in contemporary culture. The Chingay procession in 2000, for instance, included Malay opera performance and Indian Kathakali dancers. This tradition of including other ethnic groups started in 1976 with Malay and Indian performances. However, distinctly non-Chinese elements had already been incorporated into the second Chingay in 1974, when Disney characters were included. In 1987, the first international act – a Japanese pop group from Tokyo, appeared in the parade on a Straits Times Press–sponsored float. Because of the Covid-19 pandemic, the Chingay parade was held virtually in 2021 and 2022, when the parade celebrated its 50th anniversary. The parade resumed in physical format in 2023.