# Georgette Chen
Georgette Chen Li Ying, born Chang Li Ying (b. October 1906, Zhejiang, China­–d. 15 March 1993, Singapore), was one of Singapore’s pioneer artists who established the Nanyang style of painting. Known for her still lifes and portraits in oils, Chen was awarded the Cultural Medallion in 1982 for her outstanding achievements and contributions to art in Singapore.

## Early life
In her research into Georgette Chen’s life in 1997, Jane Chia, then a senior lecturer in the Arts Division at the National Institute of Education, uncovered Chen’s marriage certificate of 1930 that stated she was born in Zhejiang, China, in October 1906. At the time of her research, the common belief had been that the artist was born in Paris, France, in 1907, but Chia found no birth record to either confirm or refute this. Chen had on different occasions, stated her place of birth as France or China, and her year of birth as 1906 or 1907. Since the marriage certificate was an official document witnessed by the Chinese Consul General, it was highly likely that Chen was born in Zhejiang in 1906.
 
The daughter of a businessman who dealt in Asian art and antiques, Chen lived a privileged life in her early years, travelling throughout China, Paris and New York. She attended art classes at the Art Students League of New York between 1926 and 1927, and later studied art at the Académie Colarossi and Académie Biloul in Paris.

In 1930, Chen married her first husband, Eugene Chen Youren, the Chinese Foreign Minister. This was also the year that the first of her art works was accepted for exhibition at the Salon d'Automne in Paris. While her early works, such as "Coast of Brittany" (circa 1930) and "Landscape" (circa 1930–33) were rendered in a style similar to the Realist and Barbizon schools of art, many of her subsequent works created in the latter part of her life were influenced by late 19th century and early 20th century Post-Impressionists and Fauvists such as Maurice Utrillo, Paul Cezanne and Vincent van Gogh.

## Key exhibitions
In 1937, Chen’s work was exhibited at two major exhibitions in Paris: the Palace of Painting as part of the Paris World Fair, and the Women Painters Exhibition. Residing mostly in Shanghai during the 1940s, Chen held exhibitions there during this time, including two solo exhibitions, one at the Metropole Hotel in 1943 and another at the Alliance Francaise in in 1947. In the 1930s and ’40s, she produced many still life paintings and portraits of her husband, Eugene Chen. His portraits were executed in a style reminiscent of the Dutch artist Vincent van Gogh. During the Sino-Japanese War (1937–45), the couple was kept under house arrest. Eugene Chen’s health deteriorated during this time and he passed away in 1944.

In 1947, Chen married her second husband Ho Yung Chi, the former aide to Eugene Chen. In 1949, she and Ho returned to Paris where she exhibited at the Salon d'Automne and the Galerie La Licorne. In 1951, the couple moved to Penang, and in 1953, following her divorce from Ho, she relocated to Singapore. In Singapore, Chen exhibited her works at the Chinese Chamber of Commerce (1953) and the Singapore Art Society (1954).

## Later works
Chen taught art part-time at the Nanyang Academy of Fine Arts from 1954 to 1980. Her paintings from 1949 onwards displayed her maturity as an artist. She produced monumental still lifes, figure compositions and local landscape paintings, which established her standing as an artist. Chen’s Western-style training and her use of local subject matter placed her as a Nanyang Style artist, a style characterised by its hybrid art form combining Asian themes and Western art techniques. Paintings such as “Mosque in Kuala Lumpur" (1957) and “Singapore Waterfront" (1958) showed her skilled draughtsmanship, compositional mastery and sensitivity to the atmospheres and rhythms of the scene using a variety of brushstroke techniques and colours.

In 1982, Chen was awarded the Cultural Medallion for Art.18 She died at the Mount Alvernia Hospital on 15 March 1993, after a long battle with rheumatoid arthritis.

## Legacy
Chen’s legacy is evidenced in the multiple creative works inspired by her personal and artistic life. In 2007, Musical Theatre Limited staged Georgette: The Musical in conjunction with the 2007 edition of the Singapore Arts Festival. Two years later, a children’s illustrated book, Georgette’s Mooncakes (2009), was published – it used Chen’s oil painting, “Still Life: Moon Festival Table” (c. 1965–68), as a point of entry for children to learn about the Mid-autumn Festival and other aspects of Singaporean heritage. As part of the National Gallery Singapore’s Dreaming Art Series of publications on Singapore art, graphic novelist Sonny Liew illustrated the Chen-inspired graphic novel, Warm Nights, Deathless Days: The Life of Georgette Chen (2014). The National Gallery also commissioned a three-part docudrama on her life and contributions to the Singapore art scene, which premiered on 29 April 2015.